---
title: Extension 00-01 to File Reference SysEx Message
docId: CA-028
protocol: midi1
source: .midi-raw-data/ca28.pdf
sourceType: local
pages: 5
sha256: 927fae40a0ed88d0be550fc56aba5e96742bd5b33de61f9ea6b98640b3ff9fcc
extractedAt: 2026-07-16T12:54:08.757Z
summary: MMA/AMEI Confirmation of Approval CA-028: Extension 00-01 to File Reference SysEx Message.
---
# Extension 00-01 to File Reference SysEx Message

## Page 1

Supporting the Arts through Technology
MMA Technical Standards Board/
AMEI MIDI Commitee
Confirmation of Approval for MIDI Standard
Extension 00-01 to File Reference Sysex Message
Submitted By: Mike Guzewicz, Emu/Creative Labs
TSB Rep: Tom Savell
Abstract:
This is an extension to the File Reference SysEx message (“CA-018”) using <ext-data> ID 0x00
0x01, providing a means of offsetting the mapping information in a DLS file by a MIDI bank
index offset.
Background:
In order to conserve storage space, is desirable to use a DLS object (file or instrument) in flexible
manners. For example, you may only want to have one copy of any given DLS present on the
system, but then use it with many MIDI sequences.
Also, quite often, it is desirable to author MIDI sequences that use instruments in the GM bank
and additional instruments contained within one or more DLS files, and also contain a message
for loading the additional DLS instruments. For this reason, the File Reference SysEx message
was proposed and ratified.
It is also very convenient to be able to use a single SysEx message to load your DLS patches into
MIDI space for use in a given MIDI sequence. For this reason, CA-018 offers a mode for
mapping an entire DLS file into MIDI space.
Usually, however, instruments in DLS files are authored such that they are mapped in bank 0.
So, a DLS file, as a whole, cannot be mapped into MIDI space without causing collisions with
some (if not all) of the GM instruments.
The composer could resolve this conflict by re-authoring DLS files to offset the bank indices in
such a way as to not collide with GM instruments. But then they would need to make sure that all
MIDI sequences conform to that offset, which reduces flexibility. Also, DLS tools are rare, and
they are virtually non-existent in stand-alone MIDI gear right now.
The composer could also resolve this as CA-018 recommends, by individually mapping every
instrument they want to use in the DLS file using the Select Contents command fields <dst-bank>
and <dst-prog>. However, doing this can be quite tedious in practice.

## Page 2

It is much more desirable to have one instruction map an entire standard-authored DLS file in
such a way that it does not collide with GM instruments. This proposal satisfies this, by defining
a single SysEx message that can map a DLS file by offsetting all the instruments in the DLS file
by a MIDI bank offset, in a manner that is compatible with CA-018.
Details:
This specification describes the desired synthesizer behavior for an extension to CA-018, which
is indicated by <ext-data> ID 0x00 0x01.
The purpose of this extension is to extend the Select Contents command in the event that the
<count> field is set to 0. The File Reference SysEx message documentation specifies that this
means to “use the mapping information in the DLS file.”
In the event that a message of this format is followed by an <ext-data> with ID 0x00 0x01, the
purpose of the message changes to “offset the mapping information in the DLS file by the
following MIDI bank index.” The meaning of this description follows.
Offsetting the mapping information in the DLS file refers to the notion of loading the entire sound
set defined by a single DLS file into a user specified bank in Instrumental MIDI space. In this
extension, rather than directly mapping it to the MIDI space values defined in the file, they are
mapped to an offset of the MIDI bank values defined in the file.
Instrument indices indicated in the DLS file maintain their values in the loaded state. All bank
indices indicated in the DLS file are incremented by the user specified bank number before being
loaded.
MIDI Banks
MIDI Programs
This is where GM presets live
DLS File ‘X’
Figure 1: Pictorial representation of API command to load DLS File ‘X’ into MIDI
bank 2.

## Page 3

Note that the DLS File Format is capable of having instruments live anywhere in MIDI
space as well, including in different bank indices. Figure below shows this.
MIDI Banks
MIDI Programs
This is where GM presets live
DLS Bank File ‘X’
Figure 2: Pictorial representation of API command to load DLS File 'X' into MIDI
Bank 1
If the DLS file contains instruments that are mapped in a location such that, offsetting their values
causes their final destination to exceed the maximum MIDI bank of 16383, those instruments will
not be loaded.
MIDI Banks
MIDI Programs
This is where GM presets live
DLS Bank File ‘X’
These
presets
are not
loaded.
16383
Figure 3: Pictorial representation of API command to load DLS File 'X' into MIDI
Bank 16383

## Page 4

EXTENSION DATA
Because this extension format is not specifically documented in the original CA-018 document (it
is only provided as a recommendation) it will be specified here.
This message has a variable length. The ext-ID #1 and ext-ID#2 is used to specify the operation
The format of the <ext-data> field is as follows:
<ext-ID#1> <ext-ID#2> <len> <extension-data>
<ext-ID#1> Extension Specifier #1
<ext-ID#2> Extension Specifier #2
<len> Two 7-bit bytes: combined byte count of <dst-bank>
and <flags>, LSB first. The <len>th byte following the
<len> byte should be either an EOX message, or a data
byte indicating the ID of another extension.
<data> Data specific to the message specified by <ext-ID#1>
and <ext-ID#2>
EXTENSION: MAP ENTIRE FILE WITH BANK OFFSET MESSAGE
This message has a variable length. This particular <ext-data> with this ID should ONLY be
used in conjunction with the SELECT DATA with select count <count> set to 0. The <ext-data>
message serves no purpose in any other message or message format and should be ignored.
Note that since the SELECT DATA field supports other formats, like Microsoft WAV and
SoundFont® formats, this implementation directly applies to those as well. Note that a Microsoft
WAV file should be viewed as a collection of 1 instrument, mapped in the file at MIDI bank 0
instrument 0. Note also that the SoundFont® file format supports only CC0 bank indices, so a
bank index of 1 should be treated as value 128, etc.
The format of the <data> field when used with <ext-data> with this ID is as follows:
<ext-ID#1> <ext-ID#2> <len> <dst-bank> <flags>
<ext-ID#1> 00 - Spcifies this extension
<ext-ID#2> 01 - Specifies this extension
<len> See above. This should indicate a size of at least 3
bytes. All bytes beyond the third byte and before
than the <len>th byte following the <len> byte should
be ignored.
<dst-bank> Two 7-bit bytes: MIDI bank number, MSB first
(MIDI CC0 followed by CC32)
<flags> 7-bit byte: Bit field containing the following flags:
Bit Flag
--- ----
0 Source Drum flag. This flag indicates the
target bank is a drum bank.
1-6 Undefined, should be 0

## Page 5

Date of issue: Jan 21 2001 Originated by: MMA
Reference TSB Item #: 170 Volume #: 25
Title: Extension “00-01” to the File Reference SysEx Message
CA#: 028
Related item(s): CA-018 File Reference SysEx Message
